Previously
on The Spanish Princess...
My sister Mary is now
dowager Queen of France.
So now I must arrange another marriage
that cements our Anglo-French alliance.
What does my brother say
my fate should be?
Henry. your sister writes to me.
She has married Charlie Brandon.
Damn them both to hell!
What does God want from us?
Perhaps He tests us through temptation.
Where is Angus?
He has had Jane Stewart
in his bed there since you left.
Get out. and do not come back.
I'm your husband. so all of this is mine.
Princess Mary wants her mother.
She is strong.
She is not a boy.
I'm told you are carrying a child.
Is it mine?
It is a boy.
I have a need
for something I cannot get.
Give me a son.
Yay!
Ah!
Come away
from the window. Highness.
You will catch a chill.
- Take him to his mother.
- Yes. Your Majesty.
Your Grace.
Cardinal Wolsey has been speaking
with your daughter.
He says she is to marry.
Your Grace.
Henry...
...I am told that Wolsey
now fancies himself
of higher office than the queen.
as he informs my daughter
that she shall be wed.
The only way to rebuild
my alliance with the French...
Since my sister threw herself
away on Charlie Brandon...
Is to wed our daughter to their dauphin.
It isn't only Wolsey.
The Earl of Wiltshire also calls for it.
and he's ambassador to France.
Why would you object?
You've never shown interest
in the girl before.
I am her mother.
And Queen.
Meanwhile. I must suffer my sister Mary
and Charles Brandon out in France
and be forced to feign that I don't want
her head upon a spike.
Thank goodness you're obedient.
No one else is.
To my dearest nephew Charles...
we hear great stories
of your kingship in Spain
since my father Ferdinand's passing.
and I write in hope
that I may see you soon in person.
There is a meeting planned
between my husband
and the French in Calais.
Henry seeks a new alliance
sealed with the betrothal
of our daughter Princess Mary
to the French dauphin.
But I wonder if there is
a far more valuable alliance
to be made instead...
with you. the King of Spain.
as you surely need a wife yourself.
and who could be more fitting
than my daughter?
I will take it
to the Spanish Ambassador. Highness.
Lina?
You will remain here with your husband
when we sail to France.
You cannot travel now.
Take care of him.
Thank you. Catherine.
Thomas.
- It is good to see you again.
- And you. Maggie.
Put all that back on the ship!
We don't need what you got!
There has been
some small disturbance
over foreign tradesmen
arriving from Europe.
We've doubled the number
of soldiers on the streets
to ensure peace.
My son is one of them.
Oh. do not fear.
It will all come to nothing.
I hope not.
He's seen enough fighting.
Would you mind Princess Mary a moment?
Of course.
Your Grace.
Princess Mary has not yet been told
what's to happen to her
when she is betrothed.
I assumed you would want to tell her.
We do not know yet
if she will be matched with France.
Who an English princess marries
is not the province of a butcher's boy.
Perhaps we'll find another suitor.
Oi. we got our own cows. yeah?
We don't need your poxy foreign shit!
Beg your Grace's pardon.
The language of the docks is
too coarse for a lady's ears.
He's right. though.
Nothing beats English leather.
Look at this saddle
Stafford had made me for me.
This'll put Francis in his place.
Ah. word is he's too drunk
to even sit in his.
Ah. that does not bode well
for the good character of his son.
I don't know what you're
so sour-faced about. Wolsey.
I've just made you
Chancellor of England. haven't I?
God knows I couldn't stand your whining.
The Duke of Albany will be gone
for just a few weeks.
He's to visit your mean old Uncle Henry
and the King of France.
They're having a great party.
There'll be fountains running with wine.
horses wearing jewels.
and a tree laden with sugar-plum pies.
I think Hal Stewart
might be telling you fibs.
I'm telling you. he's not.
I will be ten times my size
when you see me next.
Hal Stewart will act
as guardian to the princes till I'm back.
He'll keep you safe.
Come on.
How did you get in here?
Get out!
You're my wife. Meg.
so I have a right to be here.
Ah. so the minute that Albany is gone.
you sneak in like a thief in the night!
So what happened?
Your floozy finally saw sense
and threw you out?
The queen has said
she doesn't want you here.
- I am her husband.
- Barely.
You could hardly consummate the marriage.
It was all bad breath.
bad poetry. and disappointment.
In the eyes of the law.
the Pope. and God Himself.
she is my wife.
and she belongs to me until she dies.
Or you do.
Because if you come anywhere near my bed
with that thing.
one of us will surely die.
You from a stabbing or me from laughter.
Well. if I were you.
I wouldn't want to be here
when a woman makes that kind of promise.
Hal. take Jamie and Alexander
back to the castle.
James's other children will be safe here.
I have business to attend to
with the Earl of Angus.
And I need to write
a letter to my brother.
You think he'll help you?
He wouldn't even help us when we were
trapped in that cellar for three weeks.
If Englishmen hear tales
of this extravagance
when many struggle to find work...
They would kneel
at the greatness of their king
and be obedient.
Brother. Catherine.
Mary.
Oh. it warms my heart to see you.
Your Grace.
Will you not embrace me. brother?
We have paid the fines you ask of us.
We beg your good opinion.
- Henry...
- You betrayed me.
Be thankful you won't hang for treason.
Now our daughter must be prepared
to meet King Francis.
The king will come round.
I will make sure of it.
Her fate is all my doing. isn't it?
Because I married Charlie.
she must be
the sacrificial lamb for France.
A Mary for a Mary.
Not if I have any say in it.
Mary.
Greet your lady mother. She addresses you.
Marriage is the duty of a princess.
And I will be here to help you.
I have told her
that it will not happen yet.
It will be many years
before she lives in France.
So you must not be afraid.
I'm not afraid.
Good.
That's good. Mary.
His Highness. Charles V. King of Spain!
I must find Henry.
Come along. Mary.
You remember His Majesty.
Charles V. my nephew.
My lady aunt.
- It has been too many years.
- Mm.
Your Grace. King Henry.
I wasn't expecting to see you here.
Ah. well. it's a meeting
of great kings of Europe.
It's a chance to see my lady aunt
and to meet with you.
Hmm. Well. Ferdinand made many errors.
which are left to you to right.
I have heard many stories
of your prowess...
When you beat the French
and won a great victory for England.
A shame to let it go to waste.
when an alliance between Spain
and England makes us strong.
His name is Guerrero.
"Warrior."
He's yours.
He's a token of our nations' friendship.
Please.
He is trained the way my mother's was...
To kill a man with a single kick.
Thank you.
I accept your gift.
Why do you call him "Majesty"?
It is his favored title.
The king should protect us.
but Englishmen go hungry
while foreigners grow fat.
King Henry...
Ha! King Henry does nothing.
'cause he's too busy feasting
off of golden plates
in France until he's sick.
Foreigners take our work
and destroy our livelihoods
with their cheap foreign wares.
I call on Englishmen to cherish
and defend themselves.
Let's hurt and grieve these aliens
for the common good.
Let's drive 'em out!
Who's with me?
Come. Come. let's go home.
I know there is unrest. Lina.
But Londoners have never been this way.
Merchants cannot match
the price of foreign goods.
Apprentices are out of work.
Men whose children have an empty belly
will find common cause.
What should we do?
I'm appointed to the Royal Guard
to keep the peace.
I will keep you safe.
Ah. a magnificent sight...
Two kings meeting for the first time.
Brother France.
Brother England.
Although. I hear that we are triplets.
and Brother Spain is also at our party.
Well...
a little healthy competition
never hurt a powerful man.
I hear the dauphin
is a most handsome infant.
Then why hasn't Francis brought him
to the summit?
Perhaps he is sickly.
Indeed. we know that newborn boys
- are often weaker than girls.
- Hmm.
He'll need to be strong
if he's to wed my daughter.
The strongest choice
would be King Charles of Spain.
20 years old and all the riches
of the New World at his feet.
The Princess Mary of England.
All shall be well.
Handsome girl. though stubborn as a mule.
Better that than a dull object
with an empty head.
Then we'll make terms.
No.
We will see the dauphin first...
She is pale. though. How is her health?
She's sturdy.
For her marriage portion.
the girl would come
with substantial lands and properties.
It is the dauphin's health
we would like to know about.
My son could eat your stallion
in a single meal.
Ha.
There is no doubt about his strength.
This is the figure we require
for Mary's dowry.
In gold ducats.
You are surely jesting.
Your father. Louis. was paid
barely half that to marry my sister.
Your sister was a true princess.
So is Mary.
Your wife was married
to your brother. was she not?
The Pope was asked
if you could even marry...
If it could be lawful in the eyes of God.
Your Grace.
How dare you insult the Queen of England?
Come outside.
I will gladly do so.
Your Grace.
It will all be over soon.
and then we will sail home. I promise.
Ow.
Ha!
Do you yield?
Huh?
I said. "Do you yield?"
I yield!
Whoo!
Bravely fought. Brother England.
You're lucky I don't run you through.
- Henry...
- He maligned the legitimacy
of our daughter
and the validity of our marriage.
Mary has the purest bloodline
of all Europe.
And this lecher thinks
he can haggle over her
like so much horseflesh?
This ain't your home.
We are being threatened.
A gallows drawn in pig's blood.
Was it them?
I don't...
Go inside.
Curfews have been put in place.
I am on duty. on patrol.
You will not be here at night?
We will be here alone?
None shall come to any harm.
Catherine?
Highness!
Rosa!
It is so wonderful to see you again.
I can't believe it's really you.
How are you here?
We are with the Spanish court.
My husband is a navigator.
You didn't get my letters?
I...
I didn't read them all.
It was...
It has been painful.
I know.
I'm sorry.
Lina wrote to me.
But now you have a daughter.
Mine are Magdalena. Cristina. and Lucia.
Where is Princess Mary?
I've longed to meet her.
Ah. she is with Lady Pole.
Wolsey seeks to wed her to the dauphin.
I would sooner see her married to Charles.
the King of Spain.
But she's only six years old.
How is Lina? Is she here?
No. She is with child again.
She has two boys already.
I'm sorry. Rosa.
I must go.
May we speak more later?
Yes. dear Catherine.
We must speak further.
We must.
Mama!
Hello.
Henry.
Let me see.
We cannot wed Mary to his son.
He insulted both of us.
We must consider Charles for her.
I have defended your honor. Catherine.
Be satisfied with that.
Ah. your sister Mary
seems lit up with happiness
at her husband. Charlie.
They are blessed as we are.
Look at what God has given us.
This kingdom...
...and each other.
So few ever know this happiness.
Perhaps it is enough.
Perhaps God means for it to be enough.
Enough?
You mean without a son?
Why grant me all this power and fortune...
...if not to build a dynasty?
God tests me more than others
because I am the king.
And I shall pass His test.
I've received a letter from Meg.
Dear brother...
...I have sad news to share.
I think that I've lost my mind.
I fear this malady has
afflicted me a long time...
...since before I married Angus.
Indeed. I believe it is the cause
of that unfortunate match.
Since the law tells us
that a marriage cannot be considered valid
if one party was insane at the time.
my marriage should be annulled
as soon as possible.
Please write to the Pope
and bid him do so swiftly.
She cannot just discard a man
whom God has joined her to.
We must attend the entertainment.
"Hence. heart. with her that must depart."
"And hald thee with thy sovereign.
"For I had never want nae heart.
nor have the heart that does me pain..."
What are you doing?
Everything in this house belongs to me...
No. you will not touch a single thing.
...and I shall take it.
You'll find in law that it is mine.
You can't do that.
Oh. I can...
Angus!
...and will.
What does he say to them?
Does he speak against me?
No.
No. he misses you.
He hopes to be your friend again.
Well. he shouldn't have lied to me.
He said that he was true. and he was not.
In truth. I blame Mary more.
Men are weak.
easily beguiled.
Albany.
I would have you speak
with Henry's sister Meg.
I know that she is unhappy up in Scotland.
but there is nothing that the king can do.
and she must make the best of it.
I don't agree.
I think if you're unhappy.
you should change it.
I took my destiny in my own hands.
and I am blessed now with a joy
that I had never known before.
You were free to marry.
But Meg has made her choice.
and she must abide by it.
Mary. my darling.
we should listen to the queen.
Meg has consulted law books
and learned there may be grounds
for an annulment.
There are not.
And the Douglases are useful to the king
because they are pro-English.
so he cannot make a stand against them
in some harebrained quest against Angus.
Please ensure she knows this.
Lina. quickly. bring the boys.
- What is it?
- The curfews have been broken.
I will take you to the palace
where it is safe.
Come on. Come on.
Come on. come on.
Move away.
All right. lads. let's have it.
Drop that club!
Come on. Come with me.
Get back here!
By order of the king!
Bessie's house is closer than the palace.
There will be guards there for her son.
Let's go. come with me.
Next to me! Next to me!
My dear Catherine.
such pain.
I see that plainly.
Henry has a healthy boy
with my own lady. Bessie.
All my efforts have been in vain.
I am sorry.
But...
he is still kind to you?
The king?
He has...
changed.
He is disappointed.
It is not his fault.
I have given him nothing.
No.
Forgive me. but this is not true.
And you hurt your own heart without cause.
You have given the king
a strong. intelligent daughter.
- What use is that?
- Catherine.
Your mother is Queen Isabella of Castile.
Your daughter is from a line
of warrior queens.
Forget about some milksop English boy.
Mary is your heir. your legacy.
She will be the one to rule
and follow you in greatness.
But she needs her mother's love
to do that.
I did not expect to see him.
What happened to his eye?
- He lost it in a joust.
- Oh.
I should've told you he was here.
I'm sorry.
Rosa.
You look well.
You look beautiful.
Like a...
...peach.
No. A...
Sorry.
I am well. Thank you.
Are you happy?
More than I ever thought
it possible to be.
I think about you so often.
What might have been.
You should not regret.
Our choices take us
where we're meant to be.
My husband. Alvaro.
I hope you may find peace. Edward.
- Ah...
- Oh. for the love of God. Wolsey.
get away from me.
Ah.
The man they call the "Alter Rex."
Uh. you are mistaken.
No... no one calls me that.
Yes. I have heard it.
The "other king."
Well. uh. that is what is said.
It's very droll.
It's like a play written
for "Twelfth Night."
where-where a stupid mummer
thinks he should be king.
Lina. Oviedo. Come in. Come in.
I'm sorry to bother you
in the middle of the night.
Are you all safe?
We heard the fights break out.
You must've been afraid.
We will not burden you for long.
I suppose it was bound
to happen sooner or later.
When men are starving and out of work.
unrest will surely follow.
Not in England.
It is not the way of honest working men
who know God's order.
It's the incomers who have done this.
Incomers are the victims of the violence.
Well. they take
the work of the Englishmen.
and this is what results.
The Tudors do not brook rebellion.
Some heads on Tower Bridge will soon
remind people of the proper order here.
I must go to assist the Sheriff's men.
Lina.
The king calls us to leave for England!
Your Grace.
I heard about the rioting in London
and that you must return immediately.
Maybe I should raise the price of ale.
That might stop them.
Not all young men can drink
like we used to. eh. Charlie?
Still be up at dawn to hunt.
Those were the days.
I'm told that you paid your fines.
Mm.
You are pardoned.
You may return to England with us.
you and Mary. if you wish.
Thank you. Henry.
God bless you.
Catherine.
Princess Mary is ready to leave.
What has he decided?
Who will she marry?
He is weighing up the merits
of the dauphin. my nephew Charles...
...or if he trusts me or Wolsey more.
Catherine.
Highness. you are leaving?
It was wonderful to see you. Rosa.
and so happy.
You deserve it all.
The secret to happiness
is to value what you have.
not yearn for what you do not.
Love your daughter...
and your God.
Hold on to them.
They are what matter.
They are what will endure.
I want you to have this.
You need it more than I do now.
Find your way back to her...
to your daughter and to yourself.
Mary?
Come sit with me.
Let's watch the waves.
Henry. I would like to educate
our daughter.
Educate her?
Not just in needlework and music...
but philosophy. languages.
affairs of state.
She will be educated as a boy would be.
and I will oversee it.
For what reason?
She will be a queen one day
and must learn how to rule.
Once her betrothal is decided.
you may teach the girl anything you wish.
Thank you. Henry.
You are a good man.
Pretty girl.
Oh. Mary. that's wonderful.
What causes so much merriment?
Mary is an uncanny mimic of King Francis.
May I hear it. Mary?
Reggie was the same with me.
He was away for so long.
he did not know a mother's love.
He would not speak to me either.
But it is not too late
if you work hard with her.
- She just needs time.
- I will give it to her.
I will be worthy of her.
Your Grace. we will reach England
by nightfall.
Thank you. Lord Stafford.
Enough of this!
Enough.
Go home.
Do not draw your arms at me.
Go home. and there will be no charge.
Arrest them!
I want all these men in chains!
Kill the dogs!
They dare to go against the king.
Kill them all!
Henry. no! He's unarmed!
Lina.
He's gone.
We are not safe here.
We should go to the palace.
I tried to stop them.
I saw it.
I saw what Henry Pole did.
They rise against the king.
they get whatever fate his men decide.
You are not the same as Pole.
You must not think you are.
I see the rioters and the immigrants...
poor men alike.
but they fight and blame each other.
When. in truth. it is the king
who is the cause
of all their suffering.
with his endless taxes.
Don't say such things.
Not even to me.
How do we get through?
For the love of God. Stafford.
protect my daughter and the queen.
Mary. I'm just...
Mary?
No. Where-w-where is she?
- Mary!
- Stay on your horse. Your Grace.
I will find her.
- Mary?
- Mary? Princess Mary?
Mary! Mary!
Ah. Mary!
Mary!
Ah! Mary! Mary!
Mary! Mary!
Ah. ah!
Mary!
Mary. Mary!
Ah! Mary.
Mary! Mary!
Mother!
Mary! Give her to me!
Give-give her to me!
Mary.
Stafford's found her!
Highness.
Are you hurt?
We were caught in it.
I lost Mary.
I thought I was being punished.
You-you and your child?
We are well.
The boys and Oviedo. too.
- Good.
- But. Highness...
...some of the royal soldiers...
Uh. take Mary.
Henry.
- I am worried for our daughter.
- The world's gone mad.
First. treason in the city.
and now my sister writes another letter
trying to shame me to all of Christendom.
She even tries to resurrect
the dead Scots king.
Dear brother.
I write to you in desperation.
I have learned my husband. James IV.
did not die at Flodden
but escaped and lives!
This means my marriage
to the Earl of Angus is unlawful.
I have checked this in the law books.
Please appeal to the Pope on my behalf.
He must annul my marriage.
Bless me. Lord.
I am a sinner.
Grant me Your forgiveness.
and help me know
what You would have me do.
To my dearest sister Meg.
I bid you. please. desist your letters
and this blasphemous assault on marriage.
I have supported you and your regency
in every way I can.
But you must accept
your marriage has been made in God's eyes
and the law's.
and you shame yourself
in trying to revoke it.
Make your peace with Angus.
Be a good wife to him.
Rosa... she was well?
And happy?
Did you speak to her?
I did.
Mary. I want to talk to you
about the shouting...
...and the people who were hurt
out in the streets.
I know you must have been afraid.
but you were very brave.
Perhaps tomorrow we could walk together.
Out in the gardens?
The bad men will be hanged.
What?
My father cuts their heads off.
"John Wright.
inciting violence on the street.
"Richard Fletcher. inciting to riot.
"Henry Swift.
assaulting the king's soldiers.
Mark Littleton. destroying"...
Henry. I must speak with you about Mary.
"Destroying a wool merchant's property.
"John Lincoln.
assaulting the king's soldiers.
inciting violence."
These are the ring leaders
that my men apprehended. Your Grace.
They rose against the king's peace.
They are rebels. They must pay.
Henry. you must show them mercy.
They are your subjects.
They did not rise up against you.
They are simply hungry
and can find no work.
- You saw the chaos in the streets.
- Yeah.
And London's children all saw bloodshed.
Mary among them.
She is disturbed by it.
Please...
...spare them from further pain.
Save their innocence.
Do not have their fathers' blood
on your hands.
They will hang.
Wolsey. make arrangements.
I serve the king's wish.
"Be a good wife.
Make your peace."
We have no horses.
He has taken them.
So we will walk.
Your Grace. these men
do not deserve to die.
They are starving. They have nothing.
The worst assaults came
from the royal soldiers.
I have tried. but I will try again.
Your Grace?
Henry. please.
I beg you to reconsider.
I've said I will not.
The condemned have been found guilty
of attacks on foreign persons
and breaking the king's peace.
Do you have any final words?
- Mercy. please.
- Have mercy.
Mercy. my Lord!
Hang them.
- Henry...
- They can die without me watching them.
Henry.
Henry. I beg you to reconsider.
What they did was wrong.
but they were starving.
They will bend to my will.
and so will you.
The whole of England bows
to your will. Your Grace.
Catherine. go to Mary
and tell her she will be queen.
Queen of Spain. as her grandmother was.
You will marry her to Charles?
Thank you. Henry.
Thank you for our daughter's sake.
And let me never hear the title
"Alter Rex" again.
Your Grace. I beg forgiveness...
My title is Your Majesty.
Remember it.
Your Majesty...
...please spare these men.
I am...
I am with child again.
Please spare them for his sake.
It's one final chance.
Grant them mercy.
Thank you.
"John Wright.
inciting violence in the street.
"William Smith.
theft of a merchant's property.
"John Lincoln.
assaulting the king's soldiers.
"inciting violence.
May God have mercy on their souls."
Stop! Stop!
His Majesty the king has pardoned them.
They may go free.
- God save the king.
- God save the king!
God save King Henry!
God save the king!
We went hunting. lady mother.
So you have not missed
your poor mother at all?
Albany arrived this morning.
We were gonna ride down to see you.
Angus is gone.
He has taken everything I own.
Everything that is theirs. too.
And my brother will not help me.
and Catherine bids me to...
"keep the peace" and "be a good wife."
But I will not.
He goes too far this time.
So help me.
I know your family
has connections with the Pope.
Petition him on my behalf.
Put to him my case for an annulment.
I have researched it all in law.
I know I have grounds.
It would be the first time
he's agreed to it.
Your chances are not high.
But make my case to him.
Beseech him...
because I will find a way
to rid myself of that Douglas demon
if it is the last thing I ever do.
And none. including Henry and his queen.
shall stop me.
>>>>oakislandtk
www.opensubtitles.org